Campyloderes macquariae Johnston, 1938 and C. vanhoeffeni
Zelinka, 1928

The two species, C. macquariaeand C. vanhoeffeniare morphologically identical, and should probablybe treated as one morphospecies.

Shortdescription

cone without outer oral styles. Neck with only 14 placids (opposite to the more common 16 placids); placids alternate between narrow and broad ones.

Species with segment 1 consisting of a closed ring, and segments 2 to 1 1 of one tergal and two sternal plates. Acicular spines present in middorsal series on segments 1 to 9, (sometimes also 10 and 11 – the character is subject to adult dimorphism), andin lateral series on segments 1 to 9.
The lateroventral spines on segment 1 are conspicuously long ( exceeding the length of the followingthree segments), and located next to a much shorter pair of ventrolateral spines.
Cuspidate spines are notpresent.
MTS, LTSand LTAS present.
LTASalways considerably longer than both MTS and LTS.

Adult dimorphism: Adult dimorphism isnot fully understood, but appears to be expressed in presence or absence of middorsal spines on segments 10 and 11.

Key characters and similar species

The complete lack of outer oral styles, the fourteen placids alternating in width, and the long lateroventral spines next to a set of short ventrolateral spines on segment 1 are all characters that are unique for the species, which makes it easy to distinguish it from all other kinorhynchs. The species showsclosest resemblance to the two species of its sister genus, Ryuguderes iejimaensisand R.
casarrubiosi, but none of these species hasspines on segment 1, and in addition, lateral spines in these species are missing on segment 1 to 3.

Distribution and habitat

has been recorded throughout the world, and represent either the first, truly cosmopolitan kinorhynch species, or should alternatively (and perhaps more likely), be broken down into several cryptic or semi-crypticspecies. Besides its wide distributional range, it has also been found in a range of substrates, from more regular muddy habitats, tocoral sand, Corallina officinalis (calcareous alga), kelp and sea grasses.

Literature

Johnston, T. H. (1938). Echinoderida. Scientific Reports, Ser. C.- Zoology and Botany. David Harold Paisley, Government Printer, Sydney, Australia. 13 pp.

Moore, P. G. (1973).
Campyloderes macquariae Johnston, 1938 (Kinorhyncha: Cyclorhagida) from the northern hemisphere. J. Nat. Hist. 7: 341-354.

Neuhaus, B. (2004). Description of Campyloderes cf.
vanhoeffeni (Kinorhyncha, Cyclorhagida) from the Central American East Pacific Deep Sea with a review of the genus. Meiofauna Marina 13: 3-20.

Neuhaus, B. & Sørensen, M.V. (2013). Populations of Campyloderessp. (Kinorhyncha, Cyclorhagida): One global species with significant morphological variation? Zoologischer Anzeiger 252: 48-75.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcz.2012.03.002

Song, Y. H. & C. Y. Chang (2001). The first record of Campyloderes macquariae Johnston (Kinorhyncha, Cyclorhagida, Centroderidae) from the North Pacific. Korean J. Syst. Zool. 17: 207-216.

Zelinka, C. (1928). Monographie der Echinodera. Verlag Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig.