Neocentrophyes intermedius
Higgins, 1969

Short description

Stout, rectangular trunk, with flattened ventral side and arched dorsal side. Segments 1 and 11 composed of a tergal and a broad, undifferentiatedsternal plate that articulate along the lateral margin of the trunk; segments 2 to 10 composed of one tergal and two sternal plates.
Segments 1 to 9 without acicular spines, but have insteadprojecting, spinose cuticular processes present along the middorsal and lateroventral lines. Segments 10 and 11 with middorsal, articulated, flexible spines.

nd 11 each with one pair of long and flexible penile spines. Only male morphology is known for the species.

Key characters and similar species

Species of Neocentrophyescan be distinguished by their stout trunks, with a firstsegment composed of a tergal and broad, undifferentiated sternal plate. This, combined with the lack of lateral terminal spines makes it easy to distinguish the genus.

Species differentiation is more challenging, because only male morphology is known for N. intermedius, whereas only female morphology is known for N. satyai. Thus, the two species can be distinguished by their sexual characters, i.e., middorsal, articulating flexible spineson segment 10 and penile spines in N. intermedius, and middorsal spinous process on segment 10 and no penile spines in N. satyai. It is not unlikely that N. intermediusand N. satyaiactually represent the two sexes of the same species.

Distribution and habitat

The speciesis only known from the northern part of Madagascar, where it was collected from grey-brown sandy mud at 1-2 m depth, at different stations around the small island Nosy Bé.

Literature

Higgins, R.P. (1969). Indian Ocean Kinorhyncha 2. Neocentrophyidae, a new homalorhagid family. Proc. Biol. Soc. Wash. 82: 113-128.

Sánchez, N., Pardos, F. & Sørensen, M.V. (2014). A new kinorhynch genus, Mixtophyes (Kinorhyncha: Homalorhagida), from the Guinea Basin deep-sea, with new data on the family Neocentrophyidae. Helgoland Marine Research 68: 221-239.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10152-014-0383-6