Short description

with flattened ventral side and arched dorsal side. Segments 1 is composed of a tergalplate, and a broad sternal plate with incompletelines indicating a partial differentiation into two episternal and a midsternal plate. Segments 2 to 10 arecomposed of one tergal and two sternal plates, and segment 11 of a tergal and a sternal plate.
Segments 1 to 9 without acicularspines, but insteadwith long, projecting, spinose cuticular processes present along the middorsal and lateroventral lines. Females with short and rigid, middorsal spine on segments 10, and a longer one on 11; males with flexible, middorsal spines.
Segment 11 with thin lateral terminal spines (about 17 to 25% of trunk length), and a very short, pointed midterminal process.

aradorsal setae are present on segments 1 to 9. Setae arealso continuously present in paralateral and ventrolateral positions from 1 through 10 (except for missing paralateral setae on segment 10 in males).
One additional pair of setae is present in ventrolateral positions on segment 1, so that the segments has two pairs ofventrolateral setae in total.

Key characters and similar species

Species of Paracentrophyesarebe distinguished by their relatively stout, rectangular trunks, with a first segment composed of a tergalplate, and a broad, sternal platewhich is partly differentiated into episternal and a midsternal plate. This latter trait is unique for the genus. Species of the genus resembles Neocentrophyes and Mixtophyes, but besides the partially differentiated sternal plate of segment 1 that distinguishes it from both genera, Paracentrophyesis distinguished from Neocentrophyesby the presence of lateral terminal spines, and from Mixtophyes by having a less rectangular trunk outline, and much shorter lateral terminal spines (LTS:TL is <32 % for Paracentrophyes, versus > 40% or more for Mixtophyes).

Paracentrophyes lookquite similar, and are most easily distinguished by the distribution pattern of paradorsal and ventrolateral setae.
Paracentrophyes praedictusisdistinguished from other species by the presence of two pairs of ventrolateral setae on segment 1, opposite to only one pair in other species.
Its lateral terminal spines are without the same LTS/TL proportion as P. quadridentatus, but it has longer lateral terminal spines than P. anurus, and shorter than P. sanchezae.

Distribution and habitat

The species was described from Carrie Bow Keys in Belize, and has subsequently been collected in Caribbean Panama around Bocas del Toro.

Literature

Higgins, R. P. (1983). The Atlantic barrier reef ecosystem at Carrie Bow Cay, Belize, II: Kinorhyncha. Smithson. Contrib. Mar. Sci. 18: 1-131. https://doi.org/10.5479/si.01960768.18.1

Neuhaus, B. (1995). Postembryonic development of Paracentrophyes praedictus (Homalorhagida): neoteny questionable among the Kinorhyncha. Zool. Scr. 24: 179-192.

Pardos, F., Sá nchez, N. & Herranz, M. (2016) Two sides of a coin: The Phylum Kinorhyncha in Panama. I) Caribbean Panama. Zoologischer Anzeiger, 265: 3-25 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcz.2016.06.005

Sørensen, M. V., Pardos, F., Herranz, M. & Rho, H. S (2010). New data on the genus Paracentrophyes (Homalorhagida, Kinorhyncha), with the description of a new species from the West Pacific. The Open Zoology Journal 3: 42-59