Short description

with flattened ventral side and arched dorsal side. Segments 1 iscomposed of a tergal plate, and a broad sternal platewith incompletelines indicating a partial differentiation into two episternal and a midsternal plate. Segments 2 to 10 are composed ofone tergal and two sternal plates, and segment 11 of a tergal and a sternal plate. Segments 1 to 9 without acicular spines, but insteadwith long, projecting, spinose cuticular processes present along the middorsal and lateroventral lines. Females with short and rigid, middorsal spineon segments 10, and a longer one on 11; males withflexible, middorsalspines.
Segment 11 with thin lateral terminal spines (about 15 to 25% of trunk length), and a very short, pointed midterminal process.

aradorsal setae are present on segments 1 to 10.
Paralateral setae are lacking on segment 1, but present on segment 2 through 10. Ventrolateralsetae present on segment 1 to 10.

Key characters and similar species

Species of Paracentrophyesarebe distinguished by their relatively stout, rectangular trunks, with a first segment composed of a tergalplate, and a broad, sternal platewhich is partly differentiated into episternal and a midsternal plate. This latter trait is unique for the genus. Species of the genus resembles Neocentrophyes and Mixtophyes, but besides the partially differentiated sternal plate of segment 1 that distinguishes it from both genera, Paracentrophyesis distinguished from Neocentrophyesby the presence of lateral terminal spines, and from Mixtophyesby having a less rectangular trunk outline, and much shorter lateral terminal spines (LTS:TL is < 32% for Paracentrophyes, versus >40% or more for Mixtophyes).

Paracentrophyes lookquite similar, and are most easily distinguished by the distribution pattern of setae.
Paracentrophyes quadridentatusisdistinguished from P. anurusand P. praedictusby its lack of paralateral setae on segment 1; and more easily from P. sanchezae by its continuous series of ventrolateral setae through segments 1 to 9 ( P. sanchezaehas only setae on uneven numbered segments), and by females having a middorsal spine rather than a process on segment 10.

Distribution and habitat

The species was described from

the Gulf of Naples, and has since then been recorded from several Mediterranean localities around Italy, and throughout Atlantic Western Europe, from Spain, to Scotland, the Faroe Islands and Sweden. Besides the published records, the species is also known from Korsfjorden near Bergen, Norway.

Literature

Dal Zotto, M., Todaro, M. A. (2016). Kinorhyncha from Italy, a revision of the current checklist and an account of the recent investigations. Zoologischer Anzeiger 265: 90-107 http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcz.2016.01.004

McIntyre, A. D. (1962). The class Kinorhyncha (Echinoderida) in British waters. J. Mar. Biol. Ass. UK. 42: 503-509.

Nyholm, K.– G. (1947b). Studies in the Echinoderida. Arkivför Zoologi 39A: 1-36.

Sørensen, M. V., Pardos, F., Herranz, M. & Rho, H. S (2010). New data on the genus Paracentrophyes (Homalorhagida, Kinorhyncha), with the description of a new species from the West Pacific. The Open Zoology Journal 3: 42-59

Zelinka, C. (1928). Monographie der Echinodera. Verlag Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig.