Short description

with flattened ventral side and arched dorsal side. Segments 1 is composed of a tergalplate, and a broad sternal plate with incompletelines indicating a partial differentiation into two episternal and a midsternal plate. Segments 2 to 10 arecomposed of one tergal and two sternal plates, and segment 11 of a tergal and a sternal plate. Segments 1 to 10 without acicular spines, but insteadwithlong, projecting, spinose cuticular processes present along the middorsal and lateroventral lines (except males, which have a flexible middorsal spine on segment 1). Females with short and rigid, middorsal spine on segments 11; males witha slightly longer flexible, middorsal spine.
Segment 11 with, for the genus, relatively long lateral terminal spines (about 2 7 to 32 % of trunk length).

aired paradorsal setae are present on segments 5 and 9.
Additional setae are presentin paralateral series on segments 4, and 6 to 9, and in ventrolateral series on segments 1, 3, 5, and 7 to 9 (presence/absence of setae on segments 7 and 9 varies between individuals).

Key characters and similar species

Species of Paracentrophyesarebe distinguished by their relatively stout, rectangular trunks, with a first segment composed of a tergalplate, and a broad, sternal platewhich is partly differentiated into episternal and a midsternal plate. This latter trait is unique for the genus. Species of the genus resembles Neocentrophyes and Mixtophyes, but besides the partially differentiated sternal plate of segment 1 that distinguishes it from both genera, Paracentrophyesis distinguished from Neocentrophyesby the presence of lateral terminal spines, and from Mixtophyes by having a less rectangular trunk outline, and much shorter lateral terminal spines (LTS:TL is >32 % for Paracentrophyes, versus < 40% or more for Mixtophyes).

Paracentrophyes lookquite similar, and are most easily distinguished by the distribution pattern of paradorsal and ventrolateral setae.
Paracentrophyes sanchezaestands out from all other congeners in three, quite recognisable ways: 1) this is the Paracentrophyes species with the longest lateral terminal spines ( LTS/TL ratio >25), 2) this is the only Paracentrophyesspecies where females have a middorsal process rather than a spine on segment 10, and 3) this is the on Paracentrophyesspecies where setae do not appear in continuousseries along the segments, and where paradorsal setae are unpaired and missing on most segments.

Distribution and habitat

The specieshas been recorded from the northern part of the Gulf of Mexico, on depths from 54 to 142 m.

Literature

rensen, M.V. & Landers, S.C. (2017). Description of a new species, Paracentrophyes sanchezaen. sp. (Kinorhyncha: Allomalorhagida) from the Gulf of Mexico, with differential notes on one additional, yet undescribed species of the genus. Zootaxa 4242: 61-76 http://dx.doi.org/10.11646/zootaxa.4242.1.3