Short description

tergal plate, and a narrow, trapezoid sternal plate, with the same width as the midventral placid; anterior segment margin with deep andbroad middorsal and midventral incisions. Closing of the headopening follows a lateralcontraction, rather than the more common radial closing. Middorsal and midventral placidstrapezoid, close to triangular. Segments 2 to 11 composed of one tergal and two sternal plates.

Strong and rigid acicular spines present in middorsal series on segments 1 to 11, in lateral series on segments 3 to 9, and laterodorsally on segment 10. Cuspidate spines present on segment 5, 8 and 9.
MTS, LTS and LTAS present. LTSfrom 50% to 60% of LTAS length.

Adult dimorphism: Adult dimorphism is likely to occur in all species of Sphenoderes. It is still not fully understood for all species, but it appears that if present, it is expressed in the length of middorsal spines on the more posterior segments (longer spines in stage 1 adults), and in the level of development of cuspidate spines (in stage 1 adults some cuspidate spines are minute and rudimentary, whereas they are fully developed and considerably larger in stage 2 adults).

Adult dimorphism has not yet been reported for S. indicus, but if it occurs, it is likely that the all known type specimens are stage 2 adults.

Key characters and similar species

The species isunique among congeners, by having a small, trapezoid sternal plate on segment 1 – a trait otherwise only shared with Parasemnoderes intermedius.
It is furthermore the only Sphenodereswith cuspidate spines in the lateral series of segment 8, which easily distinguish it from all other congeners.

Distribution and habitat

The species was described from India, and has been recorded at different localities along the Indian subcontinent. More recently a potential record of the species, S. cf.
indicus, was reported from Madagascar.

Literature

Cepeda, D., Pardos, F., Zeppilli, D., Sá nchez, N. (2020). Dragons of the deep sea: Kinorhyncha communities in a Pockmark Field at Mozambique Channel, with the description of three new species. Frontiers in Marine Science 7, article 665. http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2020.00665

Higgins, R. P. (1969). Indian Ocean Kinorhyncha: 1, Condyloderes and Sphenoderes, new cyclorhagid genera. Smithson. Contr. Zool. 14: 1-13.