Short description

Segment 1 consists of a closed cuticular ring, with deep, but broad middorsal and midventral incisions. Closing of the head opening follows alateral contraction, rather than the more common radial closing. Middorsalplacid iselongate, but relatively narrow and pointed; midventral placid is large, and triangular.
Segments 2 to 11 composed of one tergal and two sternal plates.

cicular spines present in middorsal series on segments 1 to 11, in lateral series on segments 3 to 9, and laterodorsally on segment 10. Well-developedcuspidate spines presentin the lateral series of segments 5 and 9. MTS, LTS and LTAS present.

Adult dimorphism: Adult dimorphism is likely to occur in all species of Sphenoderes. It is still not fully understood for all species, but it appears that if present, it is expressed in the length of middorsal spines on the more posterior segments (longer spines in stage 1 adults), and in the level of development of cuspidate spines (in stage 1 adults some cuspidate spines are minute and rudimentary, whereas they arefully developed and considerably larger in stage 2 adults).

Adult dimorphism has not yet been reported for S.
poseidon, but if it occurs, it is likely that the all known type specimens are stage 2 adults.

Key characters and similar species

is most easily distinguished from S. indicus, but it lack of cuspidate spines on segment 8. Distinction from S. neptunus and S. aspidochelone is much morechallenging, and the adult dimorphism only contributes to potential confusion.

It appears that adult dimorphism can be expressed in developmental level of cuspidate spines, and since all three species, S. aspidochelone, S. neptunusand S. poseidon, show a variation of rudimentary or fully developed cuspidate spines on segments 5 and 9, these spines are not very helpful to determine identity. Currently, it appears that the best key to identification is the shape, and width tolength ratio of the midventral placids, that go from narrow elongate, to broadly triangular. Sphenoderes neptunushas the narrowest midventral placid, with a width to length ratio of only 38%. I.e., its midventral placid is nearly three times longer than wide. In S. aspidochelone, this ratio is more balanced, at 50%, meaning that the midventral placid length is twice its width. Despite these proportional differences, the midventral placids in both species appear as elongate, rectangular (although with pointed distal end), and this shape is in clear contrast to theconspicuously triangular midventral placid in P. poseidon.

Distribution and habitat

The species was described from the Korea Strait, and has also been recorded from the East China Sea and near Okinawa, Japan.

Literature

rensen, M. V., Rho, H. S. & Kim, D. (2010). A new species of the rare genus Sphenoderes (Cyclorhagida, Kinorhyncha), with differentialnotes on S. indicus Higgins, 1969. Marine Biology Research 6:472-484.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17451000903334702

Yamasaki H, Hiruta SF, Kajihara H (2013) Molecular phylogeny of kinorhynchs. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution. 67: 303-310.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ympev.2013.02.016